add jit post (#166)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2021-08-10-jit-trace-module/jit-trace-module.Rmd

---
title: "torch: Just-in-time compilation (JIT) for R-less model deployment"
description: > 
 Using the torch just-in-time (JIT) compiler, it is possible to query a model trained in R from a different language, provided that language can make use of the low-level libtorch library. This post shows how. In addition, we try to untangle a bit of the terminological jumble surrounding the topic.
author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydanajittracemodule
date: 08-10-2021
categories:
  - Torch
  - R
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
    toc: true
preview: images/preview.jpg
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

> *Note: To follow along with this post, you will need `torch` version 0.5, which as of this writing is not yet on CRAN. In the meantime, please install the development version from GitHub.*

Author: done!

> Every domain has its concepts, and these are what one needs to understand, at some point, on one's journey from copy-and-make-it-work to purposeful, deliberate utilization. In addition, unfortunately, every domain has its jargon, whereby terms are used in a way that is technically correct, but fails to evoke a clear image to the yet-uninitiated. (Py-)Torch's JIT is an example.

Author: I meant the latter ... as opposed to what one might think  of if coming from, e.g., java

## Terminological introduction

"The JIT", much talked about in PyTorch-world and an eminent feature of R `torch`, as well, is two things at the same time -- depending on how you look at it: an optimizing compiler; and a free pass to execution in many environments where neither R nor Python are present.

#### Compiled, interpreted, just-in-time compiled

> Starting with the former: "JIT" is a common acronym for "just in time" [to wit: compilation]. *Compilation* means generating machine-executable code; it is something that has to happen to every program for it to be runnable. The question is when.

Author: makes sense!

#### The `torch` just-in-time compiler

Compared to that notion of JIT, at once generic (in technical regard) and specific (in time), what (Py-)Torch people have in mind when they talk of "the JIT" is both more narrowly-defined (in terms of operations) and more inclusive (in time): What is understood is the complete process from providing code input that can be converted into an intermediate representation (IR), via generation of that IR, via successive optimization of the same by the JIT compiler, via conversion (again, by the compiler) to bytecode, to -- finally -- execution, again taken care of by that same compiler, that now is acting as a virtual machine.

> If that sounded complicated, don't be scared. To actually make use of this feature from R, not much is to be learned in terms of syntax; a single function, augmented by a few specialized helpers, is stemming all the heavy load. What matters though is to understand a bit about how JIT compilation works, so you know what to expect, and are not surprised by unintended outcomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If that sounded complicated, don't be scared. To actually make use of this feature from R, not much needs to be learned in terms of syntax; a single function, augmented by a few specialized helpers, is stemming all the heavy load. What matters, though, is understanding a bit about how JIT compilation works, so you know what to expect, and are not surprised by unintended outcomes.
```

## What's coming (in this text)

This post has three further parts.

> In the first, we explain how to make use of JIT capabilities in R `torch`. Beyond the syntax, we focus on the semantics: what essentially happens when you "JIT trace" a piece of code, and how that affects the outcome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first, we explain how to make use of JIT capabilities in R `torch`. Beyond the syntax, we focus on the semantics (what essentially happens when you "JIT trace" a piece of code), and how that affects the outcome.
```

Author: haha the usual (colon ;-))
guess i need to not be stubborn at least once in a while :-))

> In the second, we' re allowing ourselves to "peek under the hood" a little bit; feel free to just cursorily skim if this does not interest you too much.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the second, we "peek under the hood" a little bit; feel free to just cursorily skim if this does not interest you too much.
```

Author: got it!

> In the third, we show an example of using JIT compilation to enable deployment in an environment that has no R installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the third, we show an example of using JIT compilation to enable deployment in an environment that does not have R installed.
```

## How to make use of `torch` JIT compilation

> In Python-world, or more specifically, in Python incarnations of deep learning frameworks, there is a magic verb "trace" that refers to a way of obtaining a graph representation from executing code eagerly. Namely, you run a piece of code -- a function, say, containing PyTorch operations -- on example inputs. These example inputs are arbitrary value-wise, but (naturally) need to conform to the shapes expected by the function. Tracing will then record operations as executed, meaning: those operations that *were* in fact executed, and only those. Any code paths never entered are consigned to oblivion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Python-world, or more specifically, in Python incarnations of deep learning frameworks, there is a magic verb "trace" that refers to a way of obtaining a graph representation from executing code eagerly. Namely, you run a piece of code -- a function, say, containing PyTorch operations -- on example inputs. These example inputs are arbitrary value-wise, but (naturally) need to conform to the shapes expected by the function. Tracing will then record operations as executed, meaning: those operations that *were* in fact executed, and only those. Any code paths not entered are consigned to oblivion.
```

Author: oh, great catch. "never" was dramatic, but actually, illogical!

```

Here tracing must have entered the `if` branch. Now call the traced function with a tensor that does not sum to a value greater than zero:

```{r}
f_t(torch_tensor(-1))
```

    torch_tensor
     1
    [ CPUFloatType{1} ]

This is how tracing works. *The paths not taken are lost forever.* The lesson here is to not ever have control flow inside a function that is to be traced.[^2]

[^2]: Workarounds involving the use of TorchScript (Python) code are possible; please refer to the [TorchScript vignette](https://github.com/mlverse/torch/blob/master/vignettes/torchscript.Rmd).

Before we move on, let's quickly mention two of the most-used, besides `jit_trace()`, functions in the `torch` JIT ecosystem: `jit_save()` and `jit_load()`. Here they are:

```{r}
jit_save(f_t, "/tmp/f_t")

f_t_new <- jit_load("/tmp/f_t")
```

## A first glance at optimizations

Optimizations performed by the `torch` JIT compiler happen in stages. On the first pass, we see things like dead code elimination and pre-computation of constants. Take this function:

```{r}
f <- function(x) {
  
  a <- 7
  b <- 11
  c <- 2
  d <- a + b + c
  e <- a + b + c + 25
  
  
  x + d 
  
}

```

> Here computation of `e` is useless -- it is never used. Consequently, in the intermediate representation, `e` does not even appear. Also, as the values of `a`, `b`, and `c` are known already at compile time, the only constant present in the IR is `d`, their sum.

Reviewer: Nice explanation

```{r}
f <- function(x) {
  
  m1 <- torch_eye(5, device = "cuda")
  x <- x$mul(m1)

  m2 <- torch_arange(start = 1, end = 25, device = "cuda")$view(c(5,5))
  x <- x$add(m2)
  
  x <- torch_relu(x)
  
  x$matmul(m2)
  
}
```

Harmless though this function may look, it incurs quite a bit of scheduling overhead. A separate GPU *kernel* (a C function, to be parallelized over many CUDA threads) is required for each of `torch_mul()` , `torch_add()`, `torch_relu()` , and `torch_matmul()`.

Under certain conditions, several operations can be chained (or *fused*, to use the technical term) into a single one. Here, three of those four methods (namely, all but `torch_matmul()`) operate *point-wise*; that is, they modify each element of a tensor in isolation. In consequence, not only do they lend themselves optimally to parallelization individually, -- the same would be true of a function that were to *compose* ("fuse") them: To compute a composite function "multiply then add then ReLU"

$$
relu() \ \circ \ (+) \ \circ \ (*)
$$

on a tensor *element*, nothing needs to be known about other elements in the tensor. The aggregate operation could then be run on the GPU in a single kernel.

> To make this happen, you normally would have to write custom CUDA code. Thanks to the JIT compiler, in many cases you don't have to: It will create such a kernel on the fly*.*

Reviewer: Are you emphasizing the period on this sentence on purpose? If so, I'm not sure I understand why.

Author: oops, idk how that happened ...? will remove

      %26 : Tensor = prim::If(%25)
        block0():
          %x.14 : Float(5, 5, strides=[5, 1], requires_grad=0, device=cuda:0) = prim::TensorExprGroup_0(%24)
          -> (%x.14)
        block1():
          %34 : Function = prim::Constant[name="fallback_function", fallback=1]()
          %35 : (Tensor) = prim::CallFunction(%34, %x.1)
          %36 : Tensor = prim::TupleUnpack(%35)
          -> (%36)
      %14 : Tensor = aten::matmul(%26, %1) # <stdin>:7:0
      return (%14)
    with prim::TensorExprGroup_0 = graph(%x.1 : Float(5, 5, strides=[5, 1], requires_grad=0, device=cuda:0)):
      %4 : int = prim::Constant[value=1]()
      %3 : Float(5, 5, strides=[5, 1], requires_grad=0, device=cuda:0) = prim::Constant[value=<Tensor>]()
      %7 : Float(5, 5, strides=[5, 1], requires_grad=0, device=cuda:0) = prim::Constant[value=<Tensor>]()
      %x.10 : Float(5, 5, strides=[5, 1], requires_grad=0, device=cuda:0) = aten::mul(%x.1, %7) # <stdin>:4:0
      %x.6 : Float(5, 5, strides=[5, 1], requires_grad=0, device=cuda:0) = aten::add(%x.10, %3, %4) # <stdin>:5:0
      %x.2 : Float(5, 5, strides=[5, 1], requires_grad=0, device=cuda:0) = aten::relu(%x.6) # <stdin>:6:0
      return (%x.2)

> From this output, we learn that three of the four operations have been grouped together, to form a `TensorExprGroup` . This `TensorExprGroup` will be compiled into a single CUDA kernel. The matrix multiplication, however -- not being a pointwise operation -- has to be executed by itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this output, we learn that three of the four operations have been grouped together to form a `TensorExprGroup` . This `TensorExprGroup` will be compiled into a single CUDA kernel. The matrix multiplication, however -- not being a pointwise operation -- has to be executed by itself.
```

At this point, we stop our exploration of JIT optimizations, and move on to the last topic: model deployment in R-less environments. If you'd like to know more, Thomas Viehmann's [blog](https://lernapparat.de/){.uri} has posts that go into incredible detail on (Py-)Torch JIT compilation.

## `torch` without R

> Our plan is the following: We define and train a model, in R. Then, we trace and save it. The saved file is then `jit_load()`ed in another environment, an environment that does not have R installed. Any language that has an implementation of Torch will do, provided that implementation includes the JIT functionality. The most straightforward way to show how this works is using Python; for deployment with C++, please see the [detailed instructions](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/advanced/cpp_export.html) on the PyTorch website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our plan is the following: We define and train a model, in R. Then, we trace and save it. The saved file is then `jit_load()`ed in another environment, an environment that does not have R installed. Any language that has an implementation of Torch will do, provided that implementation includes the JIT functionality. The most straightforward way to show how this works is using Python. For deployment with C++, please see the [detailed instructions](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/advanced/cpp_export.html) on the PyTorch website.
```

```{r}
library(torch)
net <- nn_module( 
  
  initialize = function() {
    
    self$l1 <- nn_linear(3, 8)
    self$l2 <- nn_linear(8, 16)
    self$l3 <- nn_linear(16, 1)
    self$d1 <- nn_dropout(0.2)
    self$d2 <- nn_dropout(0.2)
    
  },
  
  forward = function(x) {
    x %>%
      self$l1() %>%
      nnf_relu() %>%
      self$d1() %>%
      self$l2() %>%
      nnf_relu() %>%
      self$d2() %>%
      self$l3()
  }
)

train_model <- net()
```

#### Train model on toy dataset

For demonstration purposes, we create a toy dataset with three predictors and a scalar target.

```{r}
toy_dataset <- dataset(
  
  name = "toy_dataset",
  
  initialize = function(input_dim, n) {
    
    df <- na.omit(df) 
    self$x <- torch_randn(n, input_dim)
    self$y <- self$x[, 1, drop = FALSE] * 0.2 -
      self$x[, 2, drop = FALSE] * 1.3 -
      self$x[, 3, drop = FALSE] * 0.5 +
      torch_randn(n, 1)
    
  },
  
  .getitem = function(i) {
    list(x = self$x[i, ], y = self$y[i])
  },
  
  .length = function() {

>     self$x$size()[[1]]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    self$x$size(1)
```

```{r}
optimizer <- optim_adam(train_model$parameters, lr = 0.001)
num_epochs <- 10

train_batch <- function(b) {
  
  optimizer$zero_grad()
  output <- train_model(b$x)
  target <- b$y
  
  loss <- nnf_mse_loss(output, target)
  loss$backward()
  optimizer$step()
  
  loss$item()
}

for (epoch in 1:num_epochs) {
  
  train_loss <- c()
  
  coro::loop(for (b in train_dl) {
    loss <- train_batch(b)
    train_loss <- c(train_loss, loss)
  })
  
  cat(sprintf("\nEpoch: %d, loss: %3.4f\n", epoch, mean(train_loss)))
  
}

```

    Epoch: 1, loss: 2.6753

    Epoch: 2, loss: 1.5629

    Epoch: 3, loss: 1.4295

    Epoch: 4, loss: 1.4170

    Epoch: 5, loss: 1.4007

    Epoch: 6, loss: 1.2775

    Epoch: 7, loss: 1.2971

    Epoch: 8, loss: 1.2499

    Epoch: 9, loss: 1.2824

    Epoch: 10, loss: 1.2596

#### Trace in `eval` mode

Now, for deployment, we want a model that has the same weights as the model we just trained, but does *not* drop out any tensor elements. A way to achieve is to instantiate a fresh model instance, immediately put it into `eval()` mode, trace it, and *then only* endow it with the trained model's weights.

```{r}

> deploy_model <- net()$eval()

Reviewer 2: Since you are not training a traced model, I think you could simply do `train_model$eval()` and then `jit_trace(train_model, ...)`. No need to load the weights again or trace a clean `net()`. You would only need that if `train_model()` was also traced becaus in that case `train_model$eval()` would have no effect in disabling the dropout.

Author: oh, right, thanks! I think I got really confused on that one ;-)))
